---
layout: post
title:  My workspace in 7 items
snip:   The tools and tricks I use for getting the job done.
---

[Cindy](http://diskchocolate.com/blog/2011/02/02/meu-ambiente-de-trabalho-em-7-itens/),
that cutie, invited me for this meme, so here I am, describing the things I use
in my little everyday life to get my work done. Those are *very important
things* for my work.

I mean, seriously :3

## Table of Contents
 *  TOC
{:toc}


## GNU/Linux: Ubuntu 10.10

I should start with the most important of all these things: my OS. I've been
using the Ubuntu distro for quite some time now and I'm quite happy with
it. Though I still dislike some of its organisation, most of the things are
nicer than the other GNU/Linux distros I've tried so far.

And yes, I'm saying that being *noob friendly* (as in *user friendly*) isn't a
bad thing — *au contraire*, it's one of its strengths. At any rate, it's still
a GNU/Linux at its core, and you can customise it to your likings, just like
any other distro. Which, mind you, it's the important part.

Metacity sucks balls though, so I've switched to using **Enlightenment** *e17*
as my Window Manager. Despite being a dev version, it's actually pretty stable
and the core libraries just hit a stable release a while ago. The thing I like
about it are the customisable key bindings for everything, so I almost don't
need to use the mouse for anything. Not to mention it's hella fast and
beautiful :D

![Desktop](/files/2011/02/desktop.jpg)



## Emacs

My second OS... I mean, my text editor of choice! Emacs, like GNU/Linux is
pretty customisable and robust. Vim people like saying it lacks a good text
editor — I beg to disagree. I love most of Emacs text editing features, and I
have gotten so used to its shortcuts that they just make sense (and I keep
pressing `C-s` to search texts in Chrome now)

**Kill ring** and **mark ring** are one of my favourite features. The first one
allows you to cycle through previous text copied to the clipboard, the second
lets you save positions in the buffer and cycle through it.

For programming, I use `js2-mode` with `yasnippet` and `auto-complete-mode` for
JavaScript, and `python-mode` with `pymacs/ropemacs` for Python. I use the
standard modes for most of the other languages, where available.

Obviously, I don't use Emacs just for programming. As a good Emacs hipster, I
try to do everything from it, so I use `ERC` for chatting with people on IRC,
`Twittering-mode` for posting to twitter and stalking people, `Tumble-mode` for
posting to my Tumblelog, `aHG` for versioning my files through Mercurial, and a
few other things.

For e-mail I decided I'm better off sticking with Thunderbird though...

![Emacs](/files/2011/02/emacs.jpg)


## Mercurial

Simply the best VCS. Ever. Period. Take that, git!

Erm, anyways, I use Mercurial for my versioning. I used to rely on ol' SVN pal
back then, and the transition to Mercurial was really pretty smooth. Everything
in Hg feels pretty natural if you have some background in *version control*,
and when it doesn't feel that intuitive, the great help is there to save the
day.

Since Mercurial's design involves having each command focused in doing just one
thing — and doing that well — you can quickly discover what the command does by
reading an one-line summary about it.

Those are basically the things that made me fall in love with Hg. And yeah,
I've used Git, but it's just not my thing. Each command in Git is like a swiss
army knife, and it's not anything near intuitive until you get familiar with
the git-way of doing things (which I never did).

For interacting with Git repositories I prefer using the `hg-git` extension and
sticking with Mercurial for my local versioning.

![Mercurial](/files/2011/02/mercurial.jpg)


## Headphones

Now these are more important than my OS. REALLY, I'm one to listen to music all
day long. I just can't live without it. When I'm not listening to music on the
'puter, I'm doing so on my mobile, so yeah, I'm a *bit* of a music freak :3


## Compass

Compass is a framework on top of Sass to take out a bit of the DRY from CSS. I
can't work with CSS without using it anymore, it provides lots of useful mixins
that you can use to workaround including lots of vendor prefix properties in
your stylesheets.

In short, it keeps everything cleaner. And as a clean code junkie, there's just
no way I wouldn't love it :3


## Dropbox

I love Dropbox. I really do. I keep there lots of private backups and use it to
share content with the doujin group I'm helping with.


## Cute pictures folder

This is also a pretty important item on my workspace. I have slight more than
10GB of cute anime pictures, Japanese idols (most of which are from the sweet
Nozomi Sasaki) and cute fashion clothes.

And what do I do with them? Well, I just stare and go d'awww, of course, then
get motivated to do work :3

It goes without saying that all my pictures include properly dressed girls (and
traps)...

![Images folder](/files/2011/02/images.jpg)


## Wrapping it up

That's about it. But now that I've gone through it all, I'm curious to see how
my fella programmers' workspace looks like.

No, this is not an implicit invitation for a meme. In fact, it's not
**implicit** at all, so go write it up now :D

